[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Venus, it is commonly
known as Earth's twin sister,
given that it is
similar in size, mass,
and proximity to the sun.
However, it couldn't be
more radically different
than our home planet.
Venus has a longer rotation
period than any other planet
in the solar system.
It rotates in the
opposite direction.
It does not have any
natural satellites.
And temps on the surface can
reach 863 degrees Fahrenheit.
Could there be a reason why
this completely different planet
is called our sister planet?
After the sun and
the moon, Venus
is the third brightest
body in our sky.
And because of
this, most experts
believe this is why it
received lots of attention
from all the great
ancient civilizations.
But could Venus have
played another role
in the history of our planet,
as well as the beginning
of our civilization?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In Roman mythology,
Venus was the goddess
of love, sex, beauty,
and fertility.
She was the Roman counterpart
to the Greek Aphrodite.
However, Roman Venus
had many abilities
beyond the Greek Aphrodite.
She was also the
goddess of victory.
According to
Hesiod's "Theogony,"
Aphrodite was born of
the foam from the sea
after Saturn, Greek Cronus,
castrated his father Uranus
and his blood fell to the sea.
There are countless
pieces of artwork
where she emerges from
the sea as if born
from the bottom of the ocean.
But according to the
Electric Universe team,
although this is
recorded as a myth,
there might be evidence that
millions of people on Earth
could have witnessed
the birth of Venus
in the sky 10,000 years ago.
>> So the ancients, they
witnessed the expulsion
and departure from Saturn.
There would have been
an ionospheric display,
which would've been
quite spectacular.
The whole thing
would have lit up.
Saturn was trying
desperately to remove charge
and to satisfy its environment.
The effect would be of
like the expulsion of part
of the surface of Saturn.
And remember that even though
it was a brown dwarf star,
every star has a planetary core.
So the material
would have been hot
and it would have been
propelled into space
by the electric force,
which can overcome gravity
with no trouble at all.
So something the size of Venus,
or a planetary-sized object,
can be expelled from another
more giant planetary object.
The active ejection, if
Saturn's rotating this way,
for argument's sake,
the ejected matter
will eventually
tend to coalesce.
As the preceding matters
gains in mass and slows down,
the matter following will pile
up and form a large object.
If Saturn's rotating
this way, this
will be giving her a backward
kick, just like emission gears,
which means that this planet,
this newly-formed planet,
is glowing red hot and it is
rotating slightly backwards.
It doesn't stay
there long enough
to stabilize this
rotation to match
its orbital rate
around its parent
like all other
satellites tend to do.
>> Wal believes this
newly-formed satellite was none
other than Venus.
>> Now, Venus, having been
expelled during this process,
Saturn is also accelerating
away from its entourage
of the planet.
And in doing so, it
would spiral in and form
part of the polar column.
Now, its tail is not
lost during all of this.
And this spiraling
is shown in the eye
of Ra, the Egyptian
eye, where you
have this curl beneath the eye.
That is a
representation of Venus
as its establishing its own
journey after separation
from proto-Saturn.
Of course, this
discharging would
have made it a phenomenal
sight in the sky.
>> The team dissects more
interpretations of this
newly-formed goddess in the sky.
>> The whole episode of Venus as
a soul is a fascinating story.
It's one that will be
familiar with the dying god
myth made famous by James
Frazer's "Golden Bough" series.
And in different
exemplars of that myth,
the great god's lock of
hair disappears, runs off
with his soul.
And so the example
from the Greek myth
would be King Pterelaus,
his lock of hair
rushes off as a woman
called Comaetho.
And Comaetho was an
epithet of Aphrodite.
As you look into those
myths around the globe,
they're especially
popular in ancient Egypt
where a lock of
hair is responsible
for early disasters, you
quickly figure out, or deduce,
that the planet Venus,
during its comet-Ike phase,
was interpreted
as a lock of hair.
And so the planet
Venus was engaged
in a series of
activities spanning
many hundreds of
years, of course,
so it wasn't just a
stable object in the sky.
So at one time, it would
look like an eye, let's say,
when in conjunction with Mars.
At another time it would
look like a dragon.
But in one of the
earliest episodes
is when the great
god dies and she
departs as a comet-like
object and is said
to have wandered about the sky.
And the goddesses in
question, like Isis, Aphrodite
would be the other,
they are always
wandering with disheveled hair,
a classic example of a comet.
And so they had certain rituals.
And this was all part of
worshipping departed souls.
Elitist is the Greek
word for wander.
So the wandering goddess
is simply a variation upon
the global motif of the planet
Venus as a mourning goddess,
as in M-O-U-R-N-I-N-G. So that's
like when Ishtar's lover dies,
she mourns, wanders
the world mourning.
When Osiris dies, Isis wanders
the world with disheveled hair,
mourning the loss
of her consort.
And that is archetypal
myth associated
with the planet Venus.
>> Venus, according
to ancient accounts,
would make such a spectacle
in the sky that it would lend
itself to more archetypes that
show up in our modern world.
>> This thing would draw out
into a tail which would then,
by the time it
came around again,
would close the circuit and
there would be a complete
circle.
It would be the uroboros,
a snake swallowing
its tail image.
And then, over a short period
of time, because proto-Saturn,
in all of this time, is
trying to accelerate away
from its satellite, Venus
would keep circling,
but it would spiral
back until it
was in this lineup along
with Mars and Earth.
And then you would
have this amazing image
of these concentric circles.
And it's funny that when you
look at images from Roman times
and so on, this circle with
an inner circle, and spokes,
and a raised boss,
or hub, or axle,
it's a universal
piece of symbolism.
And you get the
idea that this is
where the cosmic wheel, the
idea of the wheel, really,
we're seeing in the sky,
the archetype of the wheel,
with the raised axle, or the
red center, which was Mars.
>> Could the symbol of the
wheel in the sky have been
the inspiration for the use
of the wheel in mysticism,
and also the creation of
a wheel for practical use?
Our team reminds us that Venus
inspired Earthlings as well
as it tortured them.
And this symbolism
of the evil goddess
can be seen throughout
many of the mythologies.
>> In order to understand
the symbolism associated with
the planet Venus, it's important
to remember that these events
went on over the
course of centuries.
And so Venus
endured some periods
of tremendous catastrophe
and electrical interactions.
And then there were some
more stable episodes
where she took on a completely
different appearance.
The thematic pattern
of the goddess
as a terrible dragon-like
woman and/or Medusa
has reference to her
wildly disheveled hair
projecting outwards
like spiraling snakes.
The dragon, in the ancient
myths, has seven heads.
In the early pictures
from Mesopotamia
will show a dragon with
seven heads and the warrior
heroes conquering that dragon.
Well, those seven
heads elsewhere
appear on the head of the mother
goddess, virtually inseparable.
The writhing serpentine
hair-like projection
spiraling from the
head of the Medusa
are the same as the seven
heads of the dragon.
And so that's where
the Medusa originated.
And it's certainly a classic
symbol of the terrible goddess.
Another very common myth
is called the goddess
as the hag myth.
And that's where this horribly
disheveled, ugly, witch-like
goddess holds the
key to the kingdom.
And she's always trying to
find some warrior to marry her.
And of course,
they always refuse.
Finally, one warrior's brave
enough to try and take her on.
And he instantly becomes
the king of the world.
So that's the story
of the goddess
turning from the ugly,
dragon-like Eye of Horus
type of situation and becoming
this beautiful Venusian
goddess that's now the consort
of the king moving forward.
At a subsequent
period after Venus
became stabilized in its
orbit and circled around Mars,
it takes on a
beautiful appearance.
>> How can we see this concept
in our modern-day references
and storytelling?
>> A famous Freudian
psychologist named Erich
Neumann wrote a very influential
book called "The Great Mother."
In this book, he describes
the terrible aspects
of the goddess, as well
as the positive aspects
of the goddess.
And he does it from the
standpoint of depth psychology.
So from his standpoint, the
terrible Medusa-like goddess
is always a projection
of the unconscious.
And so, at some
point in the book,
he just says, in the
myths and dreams of people
all around the globe,
the witch always
appears in the exact same form.
She has disheveled hair, a
long, haggard nose, green color,
lots of times snaky hair.
And he says, these images
still show up in our dreams
and they are always the same.
But he will never
offer an explanation
of how does that memory
get into the human brain.
And our answer is,
the witch corresponds
to a historical event
involving the planet Venus.
So in ancient
Babylonian astronomy,
when they point to
the planet Venus,
they specifically call
it the witch star.
The Norse people did
the exact same thing.
So did the people
in ancient Arabia.
So the idea that the planet
Venus itself was a witch
and was the witch star, it's
an archetypal motif many, many
thousands of years old.
That image was so powerful,
it became deeply ingrained
on the human psyche.
That's why it appears in dreams.
It has a historical foundation.
>> If this is true, where do we
see other negative attributes
attached to the concept of
Venus from the point of view
of the ancient people?
>> The most horrifying incident
to the ancient peoples,
if you read the early Greek
authors, the Latin authors,
especially the
Mesoamerican authors,
they were terrified by
eclipses of the sun.
So when the sun
was eclipsed, which
they regarded as being
swallowed by a dragon,
they became hysterical.
The whole culture
just went nuts.
And they would offer
human sacrifices.
They would bang
musical instruments.
They would shout and just
rush around in a panic.
We now know that the
planet Venus, both
in ancient Mesoamerica
and in Mesopotamia,
was regarded as responsible
for that eclipse.
It was the planet Venus,
as the dragon, that
swallowed that sun-like object.
And so in Mesopotamia,
the ancient texts
just come right out and say
it is Ishtar's responsibility
to cause the eclipse.
Now, what does that mean?
That means nothing
in today's astronomy
where Venus has absolutely
nothing to do with eclipses.
But in the ancient world
where Venus was a dragon,
Venus did cause an
eclipse, that was
the most terrifying event
with the destruction
that we're talking about.
It wasn't just a peaceful
event like nowadays.
An eclipse is a big nothing,
lasts for two seconds,
and has no sound associated with
it, has no disastrous effects.
The original eclipse,
prior to creation
that is celebrated
in ancient myth,
was a devastating, extraordinary
disaster that affected everyone
on the planet Earth.
It had terrifying sounds.
It had terrifying sights.
It lasted over the course
of weeks, if not years.
It was the primeval period
of darkness and chaos.
So it only stands to
reason that Venus,
since it was a
primary participant
in those spectacular
events, that it
would come to have a part
of it as a evil reputation,
as an object of fear.
>> According to Greek mythology,
Venus has two lovers--
Vulcan and Mars,
also known as Aries.
With her lover Mars, she
gives birth to Phobos,
the personification of fear
who accompanied his father
into battle, and
his twin, Deimos,
the personification of terror.
Of course, today, we know
these are the moons of Mars.
But could this
mythological marriage
have been an inspiration
for our civilization?
>> In the ancient symbolism
attached to Venus,
certainly one of the dominant
ideas is that Venus was always
associated with marriages
and with love affairs.
So you find Venus being
invoked as the great uniter.
And that stems from her capacity
for bandying around the planet
Mars and conjoining with
him in this sacred marriage
at the foundation
of ancient religion.
And so that manifests itself
not only in those Greek rituals
of marriage that we were talking
about earlier where Aphrodite
represents the bride and
Aries represents the groom,
but there is a
constant undercurrent
that Venus is responsible
for sexual relations
and is certainly
the love goddess.
So in a very real sense,
she's encircling, entrapping,
tying up Mars.
The fact that we moderns
call it tying the knot,
that is not an accident.
We're talking about
an ancient tradition
going back to the time
where Venus literally
tied a knot around
the planet Mars,
not only celebrating
the celestial marriage,
but symbolizing
unions everywhere.
And the easiest way
to visualize that
is the Egyptian Shen
sign where you have
red orbs surrounded by a band.
That's the exact image
presented by Mars sitting
in the center of
Venus where Venus
looks like a band
enclosing the planet Mars.
There isn't a single
marriage ritual
that anybody can name
that doesn't go back
to this situation.
So what does the bride
wear to the wedding?
The big long train, right?
What else do they have?
They have a veil, right?
Venus is always the veiled
planet on every astronomical
system around the planet.
>> If Venus was a catalyst
for societal structures,
as well as ingrained fear
in the ancient people,
how do we really know that
this was an electrical event
in the sky?
Where is the proof of Venus
as this wild comet that
marries this mythological
world with the reality
of the solar system?
>> There is historical
evidence that Venus was a comet
in reports of it developing
within historical times,
a visible cometary tail.
And this can happen, of course,
if the sun is undergoing
some sort of extra activity.
Now, particularly
in earlier times,
because Venus then would
have been discharging
more strongly than
it is today, it's
a case of the electrical
connection between the sun
circle and Venus is through
these very diffuse plasmas,
which can have an unlimited
current carrying capability.
And that's what determines the
time frame for establishing
a final stability.
>> Wal's theories about Venus
seem to coincide with a modern
observation.
On January 12, 2005, NASA
launched a space probe
called Deep Impact.
It was designed to study
the interior composition
of the comet Tempel
1 by releasing
an impactor into the comet.
But when it reached the comet,
something electrical happened.
>> In the year that the Deep
Impact mission was proposed
and accepted, I predicted what
would be found at the time
of the spacecraft impact with
the comet, which was to happen,
I think, about four years later.
And I predicted some
outrageous things.
I said that a comet,
as a charged object,
will discharge to the incoming
copper metal projectile.
And it will strike
at a very high speed,
and there's no chance for
any slow glow discharge
or dark mode
discharge to equalize
the voltage between the
impactor and the comet
before hitting the comet.
So I said, under
these conditions,
the voltage difference
between the copper
projectile and the comet
will be quite different.
And I expect there will be a
lightning flash between them
before impact.
And when the experiment
finally was coming to fruition,
I listened to the command
tower, the broadcast from there.
And it was remarked
on there was a flash
before the major outburst.
At the time, I said
also, in this prediction,
that the outburst
would be far more
powerful than anyone
expects because it
will be largely electrical.
With the comet ions splattered
all over one face of the comet,
it would act like
a discharge center.
And the resulting flare out
would be much more powerful
and expected.
I said, also, there will be
extra discharge points spring
up and other
discharge points will
move because of the change
in the electrical environment
of the comet, which
is very sudden.
All of these things were
found to be borne out when
the experiment was carried out.
In fact, I was approached
by "Time" magazine
to do an article on
it, because you'd
expect that an outrageous
prediction like that,
being shown to be correct, would
be front page news, at least
in the science magazines.
I was in Los
Angeles at the time.
So I said, as soon as I get
back to Sydney, I am available.
By the time I got
back to Sydney,
somebody had peer
reviewed it and quashed it
because it was impossible.
>> Impossible?
Or was more evidence
just coming to light?
>> The Electric Universe
operates according
to the established peer-reviewed
literature on plasma cosmology.
And Hannes Alfvén, who is
the leader of all of this,
who actually drew the
circuit for the sun,
which would show that the
planets are orbiting within
the sun's circuit.
Now, any object
within that circuit
will also tend to exhibit
the same kind of connection,
that is, a polar connection and
an equatorial current shape.
And in the case of Venus,
when I saw the Birkeland
current features of the hot spot
and the tornado at one pole,
it was just simple to say, well,
the other part of the circuit
will be at the North
Pole, and so we should see
exactly the same phenomenon.
And that was borne
out, of course.
Later, it was also shown
with the Cassini mission
to Saturn, that it, too, had
this binary pattern at the pole
rotating.
And that led me
to say that we'll
see the same feature
at the other pole which
had been in darkness for years.
And that's exactly
what was found.
It's very easy to make accurate
predictions, quite outrageous
ones at times, once you have
the basic physical principles
under control.
>> Another electrifying
discovery came when
the Magellan orbiter sent back
radar signals from the mountain
tops of Venus.
>> One of the mysteries that
the Magellan orbiter returned
to the Earth was that its radar
signals were being returned
very strongly from
mountaintops on Venus.
And they call them
the shiny mountain
tops in the radar images.
There was no good
answer to that.
But as soon as I saw it,
I recognized what it was.
When I said that Venus is
more electrically charged
than the other planets in
the inner solar system,
one of the effects
of that is that there
will be a tendency to try
and have a dark mode current.
There is on Earth, in
the Earth's atmosphere,
there's a dark mote current
between the ionosphere
and the earth.
On Venus, that would
be accentuated.
And one of the
things that happens
in an electrical discharge
in the atmosphere
is that when the voltage
gets to a certain level,
sharp points and
high spots will begin
to exhibit St.
Elmo's Fire, which
is a kind of glow discharge.
There's a small current in
the atmosphere just normally,
which can be measured because
of the voltage difference
with height in the atmosphere.
But in St. Elmo's Fire,
that voltage difference
is sufficient to cause the
atoms in the atmosphere to glow.
That glow is a plasma.
A dense plasma is a very good
reflector of radio waves.
And because the
mountaintops is where
the discharge is occurring, they
will act like radar reflectors.
And that's why they appeared
bright in the Magellan images.
Above a certain altitude,
they were all glowing.
Very simple answer.
This has significance, too,
for the mythological references
to effects I've seen
on Earth, and that
is that St. Elmo's Fire
danced along roof tops,
and the tops of
pyramids, and obelisks.
So the pyramid, I think they
had a metallic cap or something
on top originally,
and that would
have acted as a perfect
lightning conductor.
>> Further evidence by the
team suggests that the ancient
people were affected
by this kind of phenom.
And they took
precautionary measures
with a famous device
recorded in the Bible.
>> Velikovsky, in his view,
his book "Worlds in Collision,"
he talked about the
Ark of the Covenant,
which he said was constructed
like a condenser and with
collecting electrodes.
And he said that in the days
when there was this chaos,
the atmospheric electricity
was much more active,
and you're likely
to get electrocuted
climbing up a mountain.
And a burning bush,
they burn forever,
was St. Elmo's Fire,
because any filamentary
or any pointed object
will tend to appear
as if they're on fire.
The Ark of the
Covenant, he said,
suggested was that as
the tribes of Israel
were moving around, if this
thing began discharging,
they realized they
were in danger.
So they would try and head to
somewhere lower ground, or flat
area, so that they're
less likely to be
in direct line of
fire of any lightning.
That makes sense.
But also, I think,
the Egyptian obelisks
were also used as a kind
of similar weather gauge.
If they start
glowing at the top,
you knew that you better lie low
and move away from high ground.
>> Could the birth of the
great goddess Venus have been
the inspiration for
a new civilization?
As the ancient people adapted
to their new environment plagued
by disasters and a new heat
source from our current star,
could they have looked
to this monstrous comet
and have seen beauty and
fear at the same time?
Could Venus be named
our sister planet
because we have experienced
so much together?
If that is the case,
what about Mars?
What role did Mars play
in the polar configuration
and its connection to Earth?
Up next, we explore
evidence of Mars
and its electrical
interactions with our planet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]